A third ethical principle is based on informed consent.
In traditional research, researchers are required to
inform participants of risks and benefits of a study.
Participants then have to explicitly agree to
participating in a study before they can proceed.
If there's any deception required to run the task,
then researchers will also need to perform a debriefing at the experiment's conclusion.
This line is blurred when it comes to experiments on the Web.
When study subjects know that they're under observation,
they change their behaviors to the possible detriment of the research.
So, how can users be brought into a study
smoothly without unnaturally affecting their behaviors?
In many cases, experiments are argued to be
covered under user agreements or terms of services.
But perhaps, we can do better.
There's an argument to allow users to opt out of being a part of
experiments through a setting on their profile, perhaps a checkbox.
But the debate on how to best handle consent for online testing is still ongoing.